okay how are you guys doing
are you ready for Thanksgiving break all
right
yeah me too so well we still have one
hour and a half to go one hour 20
minutes with the salad
so the initial motivation for the
material which we are discussing now was
our desire to generalise greens theorem
so as to apply it to more general
regions in three-dimensional space okay
and last time we made we made the first
steps towards that goal we introduced
the curl of a vector field so now we are
almost ready to state Stokes theorem and
it's going to take the following shape
on the right hand side we are going to
have something we've learned before and
understand fairly well by now I hope and
that's the line integral of a vector
field over the boundary of a surface in
a three-dimensional space okay so we are
talking about things like like spheres
or maybe a better example which we
discussed before was a hemisphere an
upper and upper hemisphere like this so
it's here as we discussed already many
times is a two-dimensional object I'm
not talking about the interior of the
sphere I'm talking about just the
surface of the sphere it is a surface
cancer two-dimensional object but it's a
kind of two-dimensional object which
really lives in the three-dimensional
space
and not on the plane not in a two
dimensional space because it's curved so
this surface has a boundary so this
surface M M will stand for membrane
you'll see why we'll talk about it later
not so fun I'm actually you know I'm
impressed how rarely we see we see this
we hear this sound so keep it up this
surface has has a boundary and that's
what I call here B of F so in this case
if it is really a upper hemisphere if
you really think in terms of the upper
hemisphere it is it is it is a circle in
any case it's a curve and over that
curve we can take this line integral
where F is the vector field so that's
the left hand side and left hand side is
kind of easy in a sense that we already
know what it means and the left hand
side is going to involve a double
integral over m itself and now we can
say the integral of what it's going to
be in the integral of what we learned
last time the curl of F so if you have a
vector field F you can define a new
vector field which we call curl of F ok
so this is already this has already been
defined and now we have to learn how to
integrate vector fields over surfaces so
that that notation here represents a
surface integral and then the interval
of a vector integral of a vector field
over the surface also known as the flux
and today we will define integrals of
this type so that finally we will be
able to say what we mean by the left
hand side and at least we'll be able to
make a statement of Stokes theorem which
we will then discuss next week
ok so that's the plan we would like to
learn surface integrals ok
[Applause]
now this is a by the way about about the
final exam which again will be on
December 19th at first year no more
jokes about it
and now I put the materials for the for
the final on my homepage so you can see
the review problems and various other
text data okay
I will put the solutions of the review
problems probably sometime during next
week alright so let me write it now so
what we'd like to talk about is surface
integrals and as always when we talk
about about things like that it's always
good to think in terms of analogies okay
and an analogy to a surface integral
would be an integral over curve over one
dimensional object something which we
now understand fairly well so let's
revisit first line integrals revisit
integrals over curves one of the aspects
of this story something that I know you
have found puzzling is first is the fact
that actually the way we thought about
it the way we talked about it there are
two types of integrals over curves one
has one type is the integral of a
function and this is the kind of its arc
length length type integral
in this case we have a curve C and we
integrate a function and the expression
for this is fds so f here is a function
on this curve and this D s represents
very small the length of a very small
piece of that of that curve okay so what
is the meaning of this integral the
meaning of this integral is that if F is
equal to 1 we get an arc length of the
curve arc length of the curve and if F
is not equal to 1 in general but it is a
non negative takes non-negative values
we can interpret this function is a
density function for example mass
density function we can think of a curve
being as being a metal wire like this
and that function would then represent
the density of mass some some parts of
it could be heavier some part lighter
and this integral would correspond to
the total mass total mass that's the
interpretation of such an integral ok so
that's the first type and the second
type which actually we have studied more
and which turned out to be more
important for our purposes in particular
for formulating things like Stokes
theorem or greens theorem or fundamental
theorem of line integrals for that
matter our integrals of line of vector
fields line integrals on vector fields
vectors ok so let me let me recall that
so in this case we have a vector field F
I have a vector field and we are
computing if line integral which we
denote like this
and that also had a nice physical
interpretation it's not math but rather
it is work done by force if F represents
a force vector field then this
represents the work done by this force
examples of such vector fields are the
you know the force of gravity which we
talked about before also the electric
field and the magnetic field when we
talked about Maxwell equations last time
you had those two vector fields a and D
right so so this would be examples of
such vector fields and and such a line
integral for such a vector field would
actually have a very concrete physical
interpretation and the work done by this
force for example electric field the
work done by it in moving an electron
from one place to another over along
this curve C so those were the two types
the reason I am reminding you of all
this is because surface integrals which
we are going to study today can also be
broken into this two different two big
categories one is the analog of the
first type here and the second one is
the analog of the second type here in
other words the first one the first type
of surface integrals will apply two
functions will integrate functions and
the second type will apply to vector
fields will be integrating vector field
and in both cases they will have nice
interpretation very similar to the
interpretation we've learned for line
integrals so let having having said that
having a record integrals over curves I
I want to now talk about surface
integrals now for surface integrals
for surface integrals we'll also have
two types now I have to say from the
beginning that it looks a little bit
disconcerting the way we talk about this
that there are two types and they kind
of seem unrelated when we talked about
these guys other integrals over curves I
actually try to explain that in a way
these are two special cases of kind of
most general integrals over curves so
from the point of view of the big
picture these are actually not so
unrelated they actually quite close to
each other but for the purposes of this
course for the purposes of the kind of a
kind of results we want to obtain in
kind of applications we have in mind it
is just easier to introduce them
separately and kind of think about them
as two different types okay one applies
functions one applies the vector field
and the same actually will be true here
for service integrals will kind of
divide surface integrals into these two
big groups but I just want to tell you
that actually from the point of view of
the big picture this is unnatural and
there is actually more natural theory
there is a more natural point of view
from which both of these integrals
appear as just special cases of some
general construction then the less will
do fine will do just fine by by kind of
defining them into the in two separate
ways okay so for surface integrals will
also have two types then also two types
the way we will introduce them here two
types and so the first type will be an
integral of a function surface integral
of a function
so we will have a surface M again like
in a Stokes theorem on that board but we
will be integrating note electric field
but a function and it will be
represented in this way
so this is not here the kind of integral
which will show up in Stokes theorem
this is sort of a preliminary integral
which is like type 1 integral in the
case of curves and this is something
which we will use to define also line it
to defy surface integrals for vector
fields the reason why we define them
first is because they are easier to
define than the other guys in some sense
and also we will actually use this
reserve this theory to define the
integrals of the second type so what
does this what does this integral
represent well just like in the case of
curves it represents something which is
sort of inherent to this curve the
quantity which is linked to the surface
in this case so here it was there was a
curve and then cured quantity for curve
which is arc length its arc length or if
you have a general density function the
total mass and likewise here this will
be this will represent for Africa 1
which will represent the surface area
surface area them and for F naught not
equal to 1 but non non negative or maybe
positive is better this will correspond
to total mass if we interpret this
function is a density function its mass
density function
okay so so let's let's talk about the
special case when I freeze the action is
actually equal to one so in this case we
will denote this integral just like this
and this will simply correspond to the
area so let's discuss how to find the
area of where this is not entirely new
and it's not entire is entirely new
subject for us because at the very
beginning of this course we actually
talked about revolution surfaces and we
talked about the areas of revolution
services so we actually know one example
at least one example of this obvious
kind of integral but now we will talk
about areas of more general surfaces not
just the revolution services we also
service remember was obtained when you
rotated a graph of a function in one
variable around the x-axis or maybe
around the y-axis but this is only only
very special kind of surf is like a vat
it is you know what I mean like a vast
is the revolution surface in 50
symmetrical that you know around where
is the revolution surface of a curve
around around is z axis in this case if
you think about vertical axis is a z
axis but not every not every surface is
like this there are even biases which
are not like which are not exactly
symmetrical right for example I have
squares so we would like to have a
formalism which would enable us to
calculate the area of any surface okay
so what are the what are the necessary
steps for that well then how should we
approach this the same drill as before
we have a piece of surface like this and
we would like to to compute its area and
as always what we need to do is we need
to break it into small pieces and
evaluate the area of a small piece and
then take the sum and then this sum when
the partition becomes finer will
actually give us an integral but how
would we actually break it into small
pieces a primer is not clear right so in
the case of curves in the case of course
if you had a curve like this
you also wanted to to break it into
small pieces and take the small lengths
of each piece and take the sum and the
way we learn to do this was through
permit realization this was in fact the
most efficient way to talk about cars in
the first place right because the
general curve was best represented
algebraically if you if you expressed it
in a parametric form in other words we
would introduce an axillary prime etre
to the parameter T and identify an
interval from so that super entity from
A to B we would identify this this curve
with this interval right and nor an
algebraic we will just write that X is a
function of T Y is a function of T and
well in two dimensions that would be
enough but in three dimensions with a
dot of Z equals zero and then we'll say
T is between a and D right so when we
write this formula what we are doing is
we are identifying points from this
interval right on this straight line
interval which is very simple with this
complicated curve once we do that there
is a natural way to break into into
pieces because we can we can just break
this interval into pieces of equal
length say 1,100 pieces of Tempe in the
beginning we determined 100 1000 and
then each of them for example this one
will correspond to this part here and
then we'll try to find the lengths of
this one and then we'll next one and so
on okay and so the result of this
calculation was an integral of the first
type now instead of a curve
instead of its curve we have a surface
right so we should apply the same
approach and we should try to
parameterize the surface this is
something which you have which we have
actually managed to avoid after now
because you know this is something we
talked about before but we we never
actually got around to trying to write
surfaces in the same way or present
surfaces in the same way we've been
representing curves and the reason is
very simple because surface is
two-dimensional
so surface is two-dimensional to make em
with called em if dimension is cool and
so it requires two independent
parameters two independent parameters
but only one equation only one equation
so whenever we could define a surface by
equation we said it's better to define
by equations and try to find translation
because one is better than two in some
sense one is easier to handle them to
one equation is easier to handle them to
parameters okay
not that the curse is the opposite
situation because the curve is
one-dimensional so it requires one and
three parameter or two equations so
that's why curves usually show up
through parametric representation on
rare occasions we will talk about
representing curves has by two equations
or as intersection of two surfaces but
now it's finally time to to use the
first approach and to parameterize a
surface by two parameters now okay so
how is it going to work well in exactly
the same way as
in exactly the same way as in the case
of course we will choose to look to the
parameters which will use it oftentimes
we'll call them U and V but again it's
just a choice of notation you can choose
whatever letters you like U and V and we
will try to identify this piece of
curved surface in the three-dimensional
space like this with a flat domain in a
two-dimensional space off of these two
parameters what I mean is that somewhere
in the background we will have a
two-dimensional coordinate system with
coordinates U and V note that this is
the analog of that line with the
coordinate T which I drew on it on the
top blackboard and the analog of that
interval from A to B now will be a
domain at a two-dimensional domain on
this axial plane so it is going to look
something like this
see now of course there is more choice
for such a domain there absolutely more
pictures we can draw like this then
pictures of intervals interval is an
interval I mean the only things which we
can play with is just the endpoints but
it looks they all look the same
here the domains look different right
they have different-shaped now you can
of course ask why would be bothered to
identify this in this the reason is that
this object is much simpler to handle
than this object you have to realize
what that is what the subject represents
this obviously presents something which
actually does not fit on a blackboard
right it is actually it can only live in
3-dimensional space in other words
without bending and squashing it I
wouldn't be able to fit in
two-dimensional blackboard here I have
drawn it on a two-dimensional plane but
that's just a projection right so in
fact this usually to emphasize this the
curviness of this object I would kind of
draw a grid this kind of a curvy grid to
kind of indicate
it has a shape and this is an in stark
contrast to the structure of this object
you see so this guy is actually flat
it's actually the guy actually fit in a
two-dimensional plane and that's why
it's to our advantage to try to identify
this curvy object with this flat one so
that's the first idea okay and once we
do that we can we can then try to
calculate the surface area now since I
drew it like this it would be more it
kind of it looks strange that I
establish one-to-one correspondence
between this one and this one right so
of course would be more natural if in
fact the flat object which was on the
plane which responds to it would be
something more like a rectangle then the
picture would make a lot more sense here
I do just a most general region that you
could have a priori but just to simplify
our pictures let's assume that in this
particular instance we will have we will
have a rectangular domain this is not
the most general one but this is just
for the sake of the argument for this
just to do an example okay so if we do
that for this guy there is a natural
there is an actual grid because just
like poodle for the interval that is
natural grid because we can just break
it into equal pieces like this and once
we do that if we identify this and this
okay we'll be able to also give a grid
to this picture you see I mean just as
before so when I say identify it means
that I would map I would try to map this
flat rectangle to this curvy dome curve
its surface in the three dimensional
space so that for instance in this
interval this interval would go here and
this one would go here this one will go
here and this one will go here but not
only that also each of this horizontal
lines horizontal intervals would go to
to this curve and all the vertical ones
would go to those curves
so if I have already a parameterization
like this okay then I would be able to
to break it into smaller pieces and then
that would be the first step in getting
the integral so let's let's talk about
examples of this kind of romanization
let's talk about examples so the
simplest one is appears when our surface
is its graphical function if the surface
M is part of a graph of a function V
equals f of X bar in this case we can
just choose x and y and X is the
parameters so or if you will we can say
say X is U and Y is V and Z is f of U V
so here is appear the parameters ation I
have represented each of the three
variables as a function of my new
objective variables u U and V ok and so
this is just like parameterizing curves
the difference being that now the
functions on the right hand side depend
on two variables unity instead of just
one variable namely T in the previous
case so that's the first example the
second example use example of a plane
because after all plane is also surface
plane is two-dimensional in fact plane
is a simple possible surface right so in
the case of planes we are used to
representing planes
we are used to representing planes by
equation exactly what I just said now
which is that surfaces oftentimes have
easier to represent by a single equation
but now we're talking about permit
radiation which is important for
integrals so let's talk about
parameterizing a surface which is very
easy because think about in fact let me
use my favorite surface this one right
so in the case of a surface in the case
of a curve if I had sorry if I had a
line to know a line I need to know a
point and I need to know a direction
vector for a plane one vector is not
enough right because one vector will
just give me this line if I want to get
the entire plane I should also pick a
second vector which is kind of
transversal to this one so if I do that
if I pick two vectors let call is called
r1 and r2 then any other vector on this
plane can be obtained as a superposition
of some multiple of this one and some
not for this one or at some combination
of this one in this one and I can use I
can use that to to find a parametric
representation for this plane so let me
draw it on this picture so let's say I
would pick so this is my coordinate
system so I would have this with
different vector R 0 and then I would
have two vectors R 1 and R 2 and so a
general a general point on this plane
would correspond to some vector R of UV
and it can be found by using this one
plus a superposition of R 1 and R 2 so
it would be R 0 plus u R 1 plus V R 2
and then if I write this in in
coordinates because as always our is
just XYZ and 3/4 so likewise for our 0 R
1 and R 2
so say R 1 is K 1 L 1 M 1 and same for R
2 then I can actually write each of them
as a function of U and V so X would be X
0 the first component of our 0 + u K 1 +
VK 2 y would be y 0 + u l1 + e l2 + Z
would be Z 0 + u m1 + BM - okay so the
here this numbers K 1 L 1 M 1 and K 2 L
- M 2 are given and the variables are U
and V so now I have been able to express
each point on this plane as a function
of two variables you will so that's
exactly what I'm talking about in
general except in general this functions
will be more complicated here there are
linear functions in unity in other words
the degree it's a pronounced of degree 1
or less than equal to 1 okay sounds
something slightly more interesting
response to a sphere
[Applause]
once because once was here for it or for
a sphere we could use spherical
coordinate okay here for sphere we could
actually apply apply circle coordinates
we could so we use as exhibit variable
as easily variable will be theta and Phi
and we would write x R sine Phi cosine
theta y is our sine Phi sine theta and V
is our cosine Phi where R is the number
R is the radius of the sphere is fixed
so see the difference between the
spherical coordinates and this permit
ization is whereas for circle
coordinates we had roll here so there
was three variables Rho Phi and theta
and those variables gave us all points
on dimension space and now we are
talking about points just on a sphere so
that actually leaves only two
independent variables Phi and theta and
Rho is fixed because Rho is equal to a
fixed number of points on a sphere you
have a question
when I do the question is what what does
this plane represent this picture means
like that plane no that's a plane in a
three-dimensional space but now I am
relating it to a UV plane it's actually
easier maybe to think about it in this
way that so here is a plane right and
this plane is in a three-dimensional
space which is our classroom right and
now I would like to parameterize all
points on this plane by points off of
another plane which sail will be this
table okay this table will have
coordinates U and V and if I have a
point UV here they will correspond to a
point here namely that would be the
point which is for which this vector
that will be this point for which this
vector is u r1 plus v r2 meaning that
this is you are one actually didn't draw
it very well let me do I have to do it
in a parallel way right okay it's it's
moving that's why I'm not good making
good picture so this is V R - okay
doesn't make sense so once I fix you and
V on an auxiliary plane right I can get
a point here namely I just drew a draw
the vector U times r1 but this one then
V times r2 I take their son that's the
point and that's this way I can get to
all points of this plane of this tilted
plane right so U and V this pair of
numbers U and V provides me a unique
address system for all points on this
green plane and that's what we are doing
in general it's just that in general our
surface is not flat it's curved but we
are finding an address system for all
points of that surface
just the way I do here for a plane okay
so for instance in the case of a sphere
you know so here's here's a sphere let
me again draw an upper upper part of the
sphere because it's easier to proceed to
analyze like this so for instance fear
of radius are some number let's say R is
equal to 5 so sphere of radius 5 so this
is number is fixed but now there are
many point here right and I would like
to address each point on this upper
hemisphere by some unique pair of
numbers I call those numbers Phi and
theta and I denote them just by using
the same rule as I use for spatial
coordinates so for example if I want the
entire if I want in pairs here it would
correspond to the limit theta from 0 to
2 pi and Phi from 0 35 from 0 to 5 this
is a hole here
if on the other hand I want just the
upper hemisphere this would mean that
theta is between 0 & 2 pi and Phi is
between 0 and PI over 2 right I put a
limit PI over 2 because I don't want to
go more than a 4 hemisphere so going
beyond PI over 2 would respond to the
lower hemisphere and then you can also
think of it if you think about this cone
if you just want the part of the cone
for example let's top this top part
think about think about an ice cream
cone so that would be the ice cream the
part of the ice cream right so that
would correspond to theta between 0 & 2
pi and 5 between 0 and PI over 4 so by
choosing limits in the appropriate way I
can describe different regions on the
sphere by using spherical coordinates
and this is the third example okay now
once I have
once I have a perimeter ization I can
get to work and try to calculate the
surface area you can calculate the
surface area and now I have so I just
have to look at this picture and what I
need to do is I need to find a way to
express the area of this one little
curvy rectangle on the surface which
will correspond to a particular
rectangle in the parameterizing domain
okay so here let's say we would be would
D Delta U the length would be Delta U
and this would be Delta V and I would
like to I would like to find the area of
this which is Delta F and this actually
is something which we have already done
we have done this when we talked about
general double integrals in general
coordinate systems when we talked about
that we did exactly thing calculation
the only difference was that actually
our surfaces at that time were still
part of the plane but the calculation is
exactly the same if you remember we took
the tangent vectors here re R sub U and
R sub V and we took the cross product
which represented the area of the
parallelogram so the the answer is the
same answer is the same as before as in
in the old calculation for double for
double integrals
it's an old calculation so you can
review that if you like just to save
time I'll give you the answer and the
answer is that this is the absolute
value of ru cross RV Delta u Delta V
this area of this little of this little
piece so that's the formula what are
they are you what do I mean by ru and RV
so our is just X of our of UV is just
vector which position vector of the
point XYZ so that's just a so you see I
plus y of UV j plus V of UV and if I
want to take R sub u that just means
taking the derivative of X with respect
to u times I plus the root of Y with
respect to u times J plus the derivative
of Z with respect to u times K right so
what I mean by X W is just V X V u but
it's just easier to write it it's faster
to write it like this so that's why
anyway and likewise for R sub V is X M V
I so you see and now to find the area
the area and of course I would like to
emphasize this is not the exact answer
this is approximate answer just as
before it's an approximate answer for
this little surface area and what we
need to do after this we have to take
the sum of all over this overall pieces
of this partition and then take the
limit on the partition becomes finer so
that and then we get the surface area so
this way we find that the area of this
membrane of this of this two-dimensional
surface is a double integral but now
it's a double integral over D you see V
being this this is D D is the domain
which is on the flat domain the whole
the whole purpose of the discussion was
to replace the curvy surface by a flat
surface and to replace a curvy integral
which we are trying to define by a flat
integral as identical original we
studied the months ago in a while right
so it's something which we understand
sir
so the whole point of the discussion is
to define the area as an integral but
over flat demand which we understand the
question is integral of what and now we
know the integral of what because we
know the elementary area and it's the
same game as before once you know that
the cementery object you know the
formula for the elementary object which
in this case is the area of this little
piece and it's given in this way in
terms of Delta U and Delta V then you
know that when you take the limit this
will get replaced by V u DV and this
will be the function yes why is there
less equal to this I would love to
explain it but I'm afraid that if I do
that and I won't have time to explain
other things but so I have to make a
choice the reason why I'm not explaining
this is because we actually it's your
bottom the explanation for general
coordinate systems which actually I
didn't do I didn't explain in great
detail either I have to confess but I
did explain explained enough of it to
you know to convince you that that's the
right answer but think about the fact
that remember the fact that the cross
product of two vectors always represents
the area of the rectangle which is
formed by them so what I do here is that
I the calculation is done in the
following way I approximate this curvy
rectangle by a flat rectangle formed by
the tangent vectors and then once I have
the two vectors the area of the
rectangle spanned by them is just a
cross product so the only question is
what are these two vectors and you know
when you do tangent vectors you take
derivatives so if you actually look if
you look at this question you will see
right away and actually we we have all
the you have all the information you
need to be able to find this because we
talked about tangent vectors to line and
this actually lines all right absolute
lines curve the tangent vectors to
curves and you will see that the tangent
vectors these two tangent vectors are R
sub u Delta u cross and the second one
is R sub V Delta V so actually the
answer comes out to this
comes out to be this but then I just
take the Delta U and Delta V which are
numbers out of the cost product and
that's how I get this formula maybe this
is an if you look at this formula you'll
see it more you know it will be more
convincing okay so having said all of
that this is a formula yet R sub u cross
R sub V D u DV which is actually you can
also write it's more appropriate to
write as ba the you know the little
piece of area on this flat region so
that's the formula for the area and now
we can actually look back at all of
those examples that we have we have
studied here and try to figure out what
was this what the answer is going to be
and the point is that well let's do it
in this case in this case R sub u you
have to take the derivative of these
three functions respect to u so this
derivative is 1 so it's I this
derivative is zero because the rate of V
respect to u is zero so I'll just skip
it and then the reach of this one is fw
x k + R sub V is actually J plus F sub
VK so now I can actually find this this
expression by simply taking the cross
product of these two vectors so what do
I get
[Applause]
so R sub u cross R sub V just use the
usual rule so you have i j k and then
you'll have 1 0 f sub u 0 1 F sub G
right and that's what that's negative F
sub plug in values here negative F sub u
i- f sub v j+ k and so it's norm is the
square root of F sub u squared plus F
and V squared plus and so that's the
function which in this particular case I
would have to put here and integrate it
over my flat domain parameterizing my
surface and that would give me the
surface area right so it's very
straightforward
likewise you can calculate the answer
for sphere for spheres you just have to
do the same kind of calculation you have
to write find out what our self Phi is
and what R sub theta is put this
together calculate the cross product
this has already been done so to give
you the answer and in fact the answer
you can guess because we already know
the Jacobian for for the spherical
coordinates and this is going to be
exactly same formula as the formula for
the Jacobian of spherical coordinates
except that now we fix the radius of
this year ever always six so the answer
is is Rho square root squared times sine
Phi right the answer wort or Rho squared
times n five but now it's R square times
because it's fixed so again if you are
working with a sphere this is a function
you'll have to insert in this integral
to obtain the surface area
okay so that's surface area this
completes the case when one your
function is one so this is by definition
in the definition goes on usually we
write definition from left to right but
now I write distinction from right to
left okay so this is the definition for
the integral over m this was our first
task to calculate the integral currently
the surface area as an integral over
flat region so this is this is this is
the answer okay and the next step is
very easy the next step is we want to
now calculate not just an integral of D
s not just vs but we want to integrate
an arbitrary density function for
example think about the mass if it's a
aluminum foil which has you know some
parts heavier some pies some parts
lighter so the mass is distributed in an
uneven way described by this function f
so then this would be the mass how to
calculate this integral well very easy
you just insert this F in this integral
and that's it okay and this completes
the definition of the first type of
integral and you know the reason why I'm
kind of going so fast over this is
because I would like you to appreciate
the fact that this is really parallel to
our derivation for example of the arc
length of a general curve or the former
for the mass of a general curve with a
given density function it's exactly the
same derivation what has changed is that
now the surfaces parameterize by two
parameters by two variables whereas
before there was only one but the idea
of the calculation is exactly the same
okay any questions about this so that
completes the double integral of the
first kind and now finally we are
getting to
we're getting to something more
interesting which is the double integral
double integrals of the second kind
where we will be integrating not over
not will not be integrating functions
over surfaces we'll be integrating
vector fields which is what is relevant
to the Stokes theorem in particular okay
and now before I define I'll give you a
technical definition or I give you the
formal definition I would like to
motivate it by considering a real-life
problem where this kind of integral
shows up and again I want you to
appreciate the parallel with line
integrals of vector fields for line
integrals of vector fields we talked
about work done by force and then we try
to see what what this means and how to
represent it by an integral and that's
how we came up with the notion of line
integral of a vector field so here we're
going to do the same thing except now of
course it's not going to be work done by
force but what it's going to be is going
to be the flux of a vector field or the
rate of flow of flow of a vector field
okay this is slightly which is slightly
trickier I have to say this slightly
prettier than the other one but very
transparent nonetheless okay
so here is the here is the real-life
situation it's going to magic imagine
then there is a pipe and you have the
flow of water through the pipe or any
other liquid I'm not going to make any
suggestion so and you would like to find
the rate of the flow through through a
given think about the membrane that
there is some think of it this invisible
membrane and you'd like to know how much
water will flow through this membrane
per second okay that's what I mean by
rate of flow so for that we have to know
the Danskin which would be amount of
water per second say over our whatever a
per unit of time and I am assuming here
that my membrane is strictly
perpendicular to the flow so it is a
particular to this pipe I'm looking
really at the flow through this section
of the of the of the pipe which is just
obtained by cutting it in a and in a
particular way so what do I need to know
I need to know the density density
functions the density of water right and
I need to know the velocity of mass this
is mass density mass density then I need
to know so this is a mass for a cube of
a measure of length let's say meters
then I have a velocity vector right
whose length is the length of the
velocity vector so this is the velocity
vector
and the length of the velocity vector is
measured in in what in distance so say
m/s okay so what do I need to do I need
to oh and also have the Delta s the area
of this section of this membrane this is
the area so this is a meter square so
what I need to do I need to just
multiply this so the rate of flow is
equal to Rho times V right times Delta s
that's pretty clear because well because
the law over given period of time
it will move say the water that will
move through this membrane will
correspond to this this part of the pipe
right which we find by multiplying by by
taking the length of the of this
velocity vector multiplied by time and
multiplying by the area of this membrane
so I think this is pretty clear okay so
now I would like to completely make it
more complicated first I have to make
things more complicated generally become
easy that's always the idea right and
here's what I want to do I would like to
now understand the flow not through this
one which is kind of perpendicular but
through another one which killed it so
we let a membrane which is tilted like
this okay
okay so what has changed now well the
point is what has changed is that what
will contribute now to the flow through
this membrane is not V is the component
of V which is perpendicular to this
membrane so this little this little
membrane will have a normal vector n
let's call it N and what will matter now
is not V by the component of V along n
because you can decompose the velocity
vector right let me draw this picture
one more time this is my membrane this
is N and this is V so V has two
components now one is the normal
component which is let's say this one
and there is a tangential component so
you can think that the flow of the water
is combined flow of the water through
this membrane its combined of two
different effects one is some water
flows through in the perpendicular way
and one for water kind of flows is a
superposition of flow in the
perpendicular direction and and the you
know the parallel to the to the domain
to the membrane and of course what is
parallel to the membrane is irrelevant
nothing flows if the flow is just like
this there will be no flow through the
membrane so the only thing that you have
that is going to contribute is just a
normal component of this vector and what
is this component so this is V so let's
remember again those products right so
the normal component the length of
normal component of V the length of the
normal component of V is just V times
the cosine of the angle which is formed
by these two vectors that's
that's this normal component and that's
just need a 10 so my my more general
formula is going to be like this so the
flow rate is going to be Rho times V dot
n times Delta okay so I hope I convinced
you that that in this idealized
situation where you have the uniform
flow of this liquid the velocity vector
is the same everywhere and the normal
vector is the same everywhere that the
rate of flow is given by this formula
and now I generalize okay but before I
generalize this a question right but n
is the unit normal vector I'm sorry I
should have said that right the question
is do I need I need to put here here I
assumed that the length of n is 1 so
it's a unit normal vector when I take
the dot product is going to be the oh
you're saying this sorry that's right
you're right thank you for correcting me
so the first of all I should have put
the length of V the magnitude of V and
second I would normally have to also put
the the magnitude of this vector but I
assumed it to be 1 to be equal to what
it's a unit normal vector if you want
okay so now we're ready to generalize it
we generalize it by saying that it could
be an arbitrary membrane and also the
velocity could be different in different
places
the last you would just be given by some
vector field okay
so what answer are we going to get now
it's the same idea as in the case of our
calculation of the surface area we break
a general membrane membrane we break a
general membrane into small pieces and
for each small piece we apply they
idealize the scenario the idealized
scenario where we assume that
approximately the velocity is the same
everywhere
okay and the normal vector is
approximately the same everywhere so
then we use this formula but after this
we have to take the sum over all of
those pieces and when we take the sum we
take the limit when the partition
becomes finer and that's what gives us
the integral of the second type and you
can read off the expression for this
integral from this formula as always
just look at the formula for the
elementary calculation which we'll get
from the idealized situation okay like
this and just replace Delta L by D s
where now we already know what D s is
because we are able to calculate years
by using permit ization by using this ru
cross RV right so general membrane the
flow rate just reading looking at this
formula is let me put Rho outside
because Rho is just a number okay it
doesn't depend on actually am I mean
might as well might as well might as
well depend so let me do something else
let me say that F is Rho times V the
density that the mass density function
could of course in general be non
constant that's fine and the velocity
vector field is not constant but let me
just isolate this the product of the two
as a particular vector field this is
formula would be nicer this way
so then well if I do that which can be
written as f dot m dot don't I so what I
end up with is an integral over m of f
dot m yes ok but now what is what is
then now I would like to make sense of
this integral by using a permutation you
know this is already a definition right
because once I take the dot product I
start with a vector field but my my
surface has its own vector field
attached to it so it's a kind of a
inherent vector field attached to the
surface namely the the normal vector
unit normal vector at each point and I
take the dot product and I get a
function and functions I have already
learned how to integrate you see since
I've learned how to take the functions
this actually already makes sense
but let me spell it out in more detail
by using by using a permutation so
suppose now that my my surface is
actually parameterised in this way then
i can i can actually find a normal
vector and the normal vector is going to
be precisely this ru cross RV which we
have used here let's actually as a
vector it is normal to the surface at
this point it is normal because remember
as I said this calculation you have to
take a cross product of two tangent
vectors when you take the cross product
of two tangent vectors you get something
strippin dick Euler to them and
therefore pretty ridiculous to the
surface this is a normal vector this guy
is a normal vector but in a previous
calculation we just took its norm and we
saw that the norm is this so this gives
me a way to actually to get my formula
very explain
flicked formula because this is a normal
vector but unfortunately it's not
normalized which is a horrible fun right
so it's normal in a sense that it is
perpendicular but it's not normalized in
the sense that is norm is not equal to
one but now I will normalize it so we'll
get a normalized normal vector okay it's
I think this because our language and
our everyday language is too poor to
express some mathematical concept you
know and that's why it sounds it sounds
really bad but so let me just try the
formula instead as I was saying anything
more
the formula is that N is ru cross RV
divided by its magnitude if you have a
vector and you divided by its norm or
magnitude you obtain a vector which has
known one is always the case so so this
is what I should put here instead of N
and also instead of GS I have to put my
old formula has already been erased but
I want to remind you maybe here that the
integral over m of FDS was equal to the
integral over d where d is this region
of R sub U cross R sub V da in other
words the sorry and I forgot the
function f so in other words D s becomes
VA times this guy so what's going to
happen now and this will have a very
nice consolation we will have double
integral over D of F
dot ru cross RV then we'll have to take
/ buy this
ru cross RV and then we'll have two x ru
cross RV G you see so it's kind of lucky
because the same quantity appears in the
numerator and denominator and it's
nonzero it's actually something which we
have to take care of because it should
be nonzero because otherwise it would
not be a permutation this is like think
about this is like the Jacobian it is a
Jacobian if you think about it it is a
Jacobian and in fact not surprisingly
the formulas we get for it say for share
for coordinates is the Jacobian
responses you could and the decoding
should be nonzero for otherwise this is
not going to be a good permutation so
that's why she's nonzero and we have the
right to cancel them out one we cancel
them out we finally get a very nice
formula namely we get this and finally
so finally we have come up with the
definition of the integral of a vector
field of a vector field across a
membrane and crossed in two-dimensional
surface if the surface is parametrized
by a flat domain d this integral is
simply given by this formula by this
double integral over d okay what it is
on the other hand what it is more in a
more economical way is an integral over
m with respect to the measure of the
surface area over the function f dot n
but since we don't want to write it each
time we will actually write it we will
actually write it will use a new
notation for it we will call as f those
vs where we put des over d s we put an
arrow in other words we say that d s as
a vector by definition is n
time fear if we do that then we can
combine these two guys into single
symbol gears with a vector over it and
what we're doing is we're taking the dot
product of F with TS
so let me summarize we are trying to
understand what to make of a sort of an
integral of a vector field across a
membrane and the good analogy is a line
integral of a vector field in the case
of a line integral vector field we had a
different reputation because in case of
a line integral over vector field it was
all about pushing something along the
curve
so what mattered was a tangential
component of the vector field tangential
to the curve what meant is now is a
perpendicular component because we are
talking about the flow a flow through
not along the surface there's no such
thing as a as a flow along the surface
it could be something along the curve
you cannot have something along the
circle it has to be across the surface
if it's across the surface what matters
is the perpendicular component a normal
component which is which is what we get
by taking the dot product of our vector
field with n so we are trying to find
this and this is called the surface
integral of a vector field or a flux of
a vector field through or across the
surface and it's very important it's not
along its across this is an important
thing important distinction between
curves and surfaces of course you do you
go along the curve for surfaces this is
the membrane you go across the membrane
okay that's why it's a dot product with
a normal and so this integral is given
by this formula F is a vector field and
the meaning of this integral is given by
this formula once you parameterize your
membrane M by domain G right here you
can actually evaluate you can actually
evaluate this integral in a very
straightforward way by simply the
this cross product and taking thought
with air for example let's suppose that
we are in this situation we are in this
situation where ru cross RV is given by
this formula this I recall is the
situation where mmm it's part of a graph
of a function f ok so and your vector
field F say is some TI plus QJ + RK in
this case we can use this formula so
what we have to do we simply have to
take the dot product of this vector and
this vector and so what do we get
that's going to be integral over the e
of - p fw - Q F sub V plus R times D a
very explicit formula you have if you if
you have to do a problem like this you
are given everything you need you are
given a vector field PQ R you are given
your permit ization in this particular
case although I have to warn you this is
a very special case when the permutation
is like this this is the case when your
surface is part of a graph right so your
given function f all you need to do is
to find the partial derivatives of F
with respect to the two variables right
and after this you assemble all of this
data into this formula and you get a
double integral and double integrals you
know how to do you use you can use any
method you like in fact I wanted to do
an example but I'm okay well maybe let's
do it one very quick example just to see
how this works and then I actually have
something to show you something fun
note that this has not been fun I have
to say the way I kind of the way I
present this material it's not the most
economical and I kind of I feel a little
awkward because this is not the best
possible way to present it it looks a
little bit ad hoc again because first
you introduce the surface area that
would find surface area was fine and the
mass is fine but defining this flux in
terms of the surface area integral of
the first type that's a little bit
that's not the most optimal way but
there is a much nicer way to explain it
and I will explain it it's not next week
than giving a review lecture for sure I
will give you much nicer perspective on
this type of integrals and then you will
see right away where these four most
come from it is it will not be it will
not look any more so ad hoc but for now
this will suffice this will give you a
reasonable definition which you can work
with and you can calculate fluxes in the
surface integrals very easily like in
this case so here is one example find
the flux of the vector field F which is
minus X I minus YJ plus G squared K and
s is part of the cone part of the cone Z
equals square root of x squared plus y
squared between the planes is equal 1
and Z equal to okay so let's do this
calculation first of all in this formula
in the formula bar let's just say U is X
and V is why I mean after all in this
particular case we don't have to pretend
that this is some new variable some of
these variables these are our X&Y
so in this case the function f is this
this is f of XY so I'm just substituting
in that formula so what I get is that F
dot DL over this membrane and by the way
it's very easy to draw draw it this is a
cone we're talking about the cone like
this and you use the part which is
confined between two planes so it's this
one I mean the just the surface of the
cone but between this plane and this
plane is equal 1 is equal to okay think
about ice cream cones so this is going
to be the integral over under this will
have to do permit ization and the
natural permutation would be by its
projection on to the XY plane and under
this projection this will go to an
analyst somebody said analyst right very
good
let's go through but you don't have to
say it's quite so loudly anyway so you
get you get some get design a list and
then you have to integrate over this
analyst and adults of course has a very
nice permutation which is that you have
R and theta and polar coordinates R
between 1 & 2 and theta is between 0 & 2
pi right so you can always convert this
into iterated into that very easily
right but now integral of what we have
to take the dot product of TF sub X so
what is P P is negative x right and
some reason right so when you do that
what you're going to end up with is
negative 4x so you first of all have a
net overall negative sign then you have
negative x that's this negative x then
you have to take the derivative of this
right I have to take the drifts for this
and the reach of this you know as well
as I do it's X divided by square root of
x squared plus y squared then the next
one is negative Y for first of all it's
- over all - because there is an overall
- here then you have to take this
negative Y and the derivative which is y
divided by square root of x squared plus
y squared and finally you have to take
this x just just take this risk where
this B squared right so why did I want
to
[Music]
I think that let me make it a little bit
easier so I write it like this so you
have the last one is e squared divided
by square root of x squared plus y
squared actually no no it's okay
let's just look let's just do it this
way so you get plus B squared da okay
and after this you have to substitute
you have to substitute the square of
this and here so that's what we just x
squared plus y squared so here you got a
very simple formula which you can now
very simple integral which you can of
course bring this take the sum and then
you cancel out you get square root of x
squared plus y squared and you numerator
here you get just x squared plus y
squared so you just calculate it by
using the polar coordinates very easily
so this is how you do it okay now there
is one issue which is left unanswered
here and that is the issue of the choice
of this vector N and let me illustrate
it in this example in this example we
are talking about this surface right
this this part but now the point is
which n which the n am I talking about
am i talking about this and which which
goes downward or am I talking about this
n which goes upward okay so there is
this one issue which we have not yet
talked about and to make everything fit
size we have to in order to make the
definition work we have to say which
normal vector we choose and the proper
terminology for this is orientation this
unit normal vector to our surface or
unit nor unit normal vector field to our
surface is called orientation it tells
us
sort of which side is the front and
which side is the back okay and as
always there are two different choices
it's kind of parallel to the choice of
orientation of a curve but again for a
curve orientation goes along the curve
and for a surface it goes across it's
perpendicular to the surface there are
two different orientations in this case
and we have to say which one so always
on the problems which you will solve on
the homework it will have to say which
orientation you have to choose one it
says downward it means that the Z
component of the vector is negative when
it says upward it means the Z component
of the vector is positive in this
particular case we use the normal vector
for which for which the K camp the Z
component is 1 so that means that this
formula refers to the upward orientation
okay and then of course the really fun
part which unfortunately we have time to
talk about is about surfaces which have
no orientation and this is something
really cool which we'll have to talk
about next week but for now Happy
Thanksgiving and see you next week